Good afternoon.
There we go.
My name is Dean Reece.
I'm the manager of the I/O Kit team.
Some of you have probably seen me do
a similar presentation in the past,
some maybe a first year here at WWDC.
I'd like to have a quick show of hands.
How many here have written a kernel
extension or I/O Kit driver for
Mac OS X already or has one in process?
Okay.
How many people have not written
one and are wanting to learn a
little bit about how to write them?
All right, good.
We have a mix of some
veterans and some new folks.
Hopefully I've got some
good information for you.
And let's go ahead and get started.
So sort of the top level outline of
what I'm going to be talking about.
I've broken the slides down
into four major groups.
The structure for today's talk is really,
I think of it kind of
like a travel journal.
Over the last year, year and a half,
I've reviewed a number of
kernel extensions both inside
Apple and third party extensions.
And I've been sort of collecting
issues that I've seen.
I've also been listening to questions.
So this is really just a lot of these
questions and issues put together.
Hopefully this will give you some
tips as to how you can improve
your own kernel extensions.
And again,
the categories are kind of broad.
So if I ramble a little bit, I apologize.
But again,
hopefully it will be useful for you.
So first we'll talk a little
bit about binary compatibility.
Obviously with the
Intel announcement on Monday,
this is something that
will be interesting.
I've got a little bit to
talk about about Intel.
I don't have any slides on it,
but I do have some things
I do want to tell you.
So I'm going to talk a little bit
about kernel extension debugging.
We have some new stuff as well as talk
a little bit about what's already there.
And I spend a little bit of
time talking about performance.
Hopefully you'll be able to take
some of this back and look at your
kernel extension and maybe be able
to make it a little bit tighter.
And also reliability.
There's a few issues we've seen
and there's also some techniques
you can use to make your
kernel extension more reliable.
So this is the obligatory
"You are here" slide,
just to give you an idea of sort
of the layer of technology that
we'll be talking about today.
If you see here, the large purple box
represents the entire kernel,
and of course it hosts a number
of libraries and frameworks
that applications link against.
But within the kernel,
where I'm really going to be talking,
it's divided into three
major plug-in spaces.
We have file systems and networking,
which fit within the BSD universe,
and then we have device
drivers and families,
which fit within I/O Kit.
And of course,
underpinnings for all of that
include the Mach kernel and libkern,
which libkern, I think,
is the closest analog
to libc that we have.
For those of you new to
kernel development Mac OS X,
the only framework that you
can use for developing kernel
extensions is the kernel framework.
Any other libraries,
any headers you get anywhere
else are not going to be used.
suitable for Kernel
Extension development.
So kernel framework.
So we'll start talking
about binary compatibility,
excuse me,
binary compatibility a little bit.
The good news is,
KEXT management hasn't really changed
in a significant way for Tiger.
And in fact, it isn't changing in a
significant way for Intel either.
So we have spent some time improving
the KEXT cache and validation logic.
Some of you may have encountered
bugs where you would install a
kernel extension and the caching
mechanism didn't notice it.
The publicly described way of making sure
the caching mechanism updates correctly
is to touch system library extensions.
The modified date on that folder is all
the cache system needs in order to know
that it needs to rebuild its caches.
But I've also seen a
number of people say,
"Well, if you go and remove the caches,
everything will be
fine." And in the past,
there have been workarounds
that was a necessary workaround.
For Tiger and going forward,
I think it's important to have a
system library extension that's
really clear and easy to use.
And then you can go back
and see what's going on.
But it's not just the caching
system that's changing.
It's the cache system
that's being removed.
And so I think it's important
to be aware of that.
And I'm sure that there are some
other things that you can do to
make sure that you're not just
going to be removing the caches.
But in fact, the caching system for
every major release of the
OS has changed in some ways.
And so removing the cache may
be an incomplete solution.
I have seen people ship products
that had incomplete cache removal,
which led to some interesting problems
because it worked fine in Panther and
then didn't work somewhere else.
So touch system library extensions is the
approved way of letting the system know
you've installed or modified a cache.
And if you find that that's not
invalidating the caches correctly,
file a bug report.
It always, in every circumstance,
needs to.
Now, of course,
you need to restart the system after
you've installed a kernel extension,
but as of 10.3,
and of course in Tiger as well,
you actually can signal Kexty and
have it rescan the extensions folder.
And what'll happen is if that driver,
the driver that you
installed or modified,
can be loaded against the hardware,
it will be.
So this is an opportunity for you
to have a better user experience
if you have a kernel extension
being installed for the first time,
or the user has the ability
to say unplug a USB device and
plug it back in where the driver
would be unloaded and reloaded,
then the system can basically immediately
make use of your updated driver.
If you have a driver for say a
PCI card that you're rooted off
of and it can't be unloaded,
then you are going to have to reboot
to get your kernel extension in.
So there's a Q&A note there, QA 1319,
that you ought to have a look
at if you're interested in this.
It will give you the details
of how to go about doing it.
Now I'm sure you've heard about KPIs.
How does this affect you?
Well, one of the issues that we had
with the kernel is we didn't
really have formal interfaces.
We had a number of symbols
you could link against,
a lot of things you could call,
data that you could query,
and it was a bit of a maintenance
nightmare for us because every
time we changed something that
was necessary to improve the
system or bring out a new feature,
we would invariably break some
number of kernel extensions.
Now I/O Kit was designed
from the ground up.
It was a brand new thing
that Apple invented,
and so those interfaces were
fairly clean and we've been able
to stand by those fairly well.
With the BSD interfaces, however,
there's a lot of legacy code there.
We've obviously upgraded
it tremendously at Apple,
and we needed to come up with
a nice clean interface for you,
and the KPIs are the way to do this.
So within I/O Kit and Libkern,
the functionality is
pretty much the same,
or in Libkern's case,
it's actually expanded a good bit.
So if you were limiting yourself
to I/O Kit and Libkern before,
you'll probably be absolutely
fine in Tiger and going forward.
Within BSD and Mach, however,
we've actually eliminated a
large number of symbols because
they represented functions we
couldn't maintain going forward.
So I'm only going to talk
a little bit about KPIs,
but the main thing as far as
rules of engagement for KPIs,
The two namespaces,
the pre-KPI namespace we call
the compatibility cache or
compatibility namespace is not
mixable with the KPI namespace.
So your kernel extension either
needs to link with all of the
older compatibility symbols,
that would be versions
prior to version 8.0.
The two namespaces,
the pre-KPI namespace we call
the compatibility cache or
compatibility namespace is not
mixable with the KPI namespace.
So your kernel extension either
needs to link with all of the
older compatibility symbols,
that would be versions
prior to version 8.0.
I should point out that there's
a lab as well that will help you
port specifically file systems,
but it will help you sort of explore
the new KPIs if you haven't yet.
So that's tomorrow at 3:30.
Now, of course,
this brings one very obvious
question is if I have to support
multiple releases of Mac OS X,
how can I do that?
Can I do it with one kernel extension?
And the answer is, of course, it depends.
So we'll talk about that.
So with KPIs, how do I release one text
across multiple OS releases?
So if you can use the
compatibility libraries,
version 799 and prior,
then that one kernel extension
should be able to work on both
Tiger and previous OS releases.
Obviously, you'll have to try it and see.
But if it does fail to load,
the most likely reason that it will
fail to load is an undefined symbol.
If you use kextload with
one of the verbose options,
it'll tell you exactly what symbols.
And probably what's happened is
we've made that symbol unavailable
in Tiger through the KPIs,
in which case you will
need to port your driver.
[Transcript missing]
So again, just to kind of graphically
illustrate the nesting here,
these are two separate kernel extensions.
As you can see, the dependencies here,
some of them are on,
the red one is on 8.0 and
the blue one is on 7.0.
You can nest the older driver
inside the newer driver or the
other way around if you prefer by
simply creating a plugins folder.
There's ample examples of
this on Mac OS X itself.
You can certainly examine the extensions
folder and see how this is done.
And to talk a little bit about what we
mean when we say binary compatibility,
this question's come up quite a bit.
I know I've addressed it
in mail lists and so on,
but I'll state it here
just for the record.
So we consider backward compatibility
the ability to load an existing
kernel extension on newer OS releases,
right?
So as we roll along and come out with new
software updates or new major releases,
ideally your kernel extension continues
to load and be useful to the user.
And we certainly put a lot of
effort in not breaking you.
We call forward compatibility
the opposite of that,
the ability to load a new driver on an
older release of an operating system.
I/O Kit does not provide
forward compatibility.
We have some active binary compatibility
mechanisms that assume that the
Vtable is specifically Vtable related,
but the classes that you're
loading in your KEXT need to be
less than or equal to what are
already present in the kernel.
So we don't support forward
compatibility with kernel extensions.
We also don't guarantee
source compatibility.
This is very important.
Again,
it's a question that's come up before.
We go to some great lengths
to avoid breaking you.
We really understand that
it's painful to bring your
source forward if we break you.
And in fact,
we have to bring all of our own
drivers forward as well if we change
something that's going to break them.
effort for us.
So we only do it if
there's a good reason.
One of those reasons would
be changing the compiler.
This does happen and has in
fact happened with Tiger.
So what compiler should you
use for kernel extensions?
Well,
for the Intel development systems that
go out that we've announced yesterday,
GCC4 is the compiler to use.
That's, I believe,
the only compiler we're
going to be supporting for
development on that platform.
But for PowerPC,
you can of course use GCC3.3 as well.
I'd recommend using GCC4 if you
can get your sources to build.
There's a few subtle changes
that you'll have to make.
They're typically not very hard.
Also, a GCC4 built KEXT should be
able to load on older releases
all the way back to 10.2.
So we don't expect to
have problems there.
Now, if any of you are still
compiling with GCC 295,
please be warned,
we're going to stop supporting
GCC 295 built drivers at some
major release in the near future.
So it's basically provided now
only for support for your kernel
extensions that were compiled
in the 10.1 or 10.0 timeframe.
There's some extra steps we
have to go through to modify the
binary at load time and those,
that particular system,
the remangler will be going away.
So please move forward to
GCC 3.3 or ideally 4.0.
As I said before regarding
forward compatibility,
what you need to use is the
oldest SDK that you plan to
make your driver available for.
So if you want to be
compatible back to 1028,
please use the 1028 SDK.
Another very important point
for binary compatibility,
this one's subtle and has
bitten a number of people,
is the OS define and OS declare macros.
These are very important.
This is part of our binary
compatibility system.
The Vtable patcher looks at the
information laid down by these macros,
and that's what it uses to
patch up your Vtable and make
it work with the running system.
If you don't put these in correctly
for every class you define,
at least the ones that
inherit from OSObject,
then at some point in the future,
your kernel extension will fail to
load because the vTable patcher won't
have any work to do if you're building
and running on the same release.
But if you're building on an old
release and running on a new release,
it does have work to do.
So in this regard,
the IOService class did change in Tiger.
So if you have built a kernel
extension on Panther and you try to
load it on Tiger and you get this,
your class is not compatible
with its superclass message,
at kexload time, then you're probably
being bitten by this.
You need to make sure you've
implemented these macros correctly.
So moving to GCC 4.0, as I said,
is recommended.
It is a little bit more
strict with C++ code.
A few things that were warnings
in the past are now fatal.
There's some new warnings.
So it may take you a
little bit of work to do,
but it's not too bad.
One common problem, though,
is casting member functions
to C function pointers.
And we use this in
I/O Kit a lot for callbacks,
for our target action
parameter callbacks.
So we've introduced in Tiger a new
API called OS Member Function Cast.
And basically,
this is something that's there to allow
you to do the casting without having
to worry about the compiler details.
So this eliminates the unavoidable
build failure in GCC 4.0.
As a caveat,
I will say you will see one warning.
With the set of headers
that we shipped in Tiger,
there will be one warning generated.
Don't worry about it.
It's actually OK.
And if you're-- really want to get
rid of every warning in your code,
send out email on the Darwin Dev List,
and we'll tell you the minor
tweak to do to get rid of that.
But it's harmless.
Also, it allows you to get rid
of the F permissive flag.
If the only reason you had to have
this before is because of the casting,
you can finally get rid of that.
[Transcript missing]
All right, let's move on to kernel
extension debugging.
So a lot of people continue to do
kernel development on single machine.
It's not what we recommend.
We are aware, of course,
that people do this and we've
actually added some stuff in
Tiger to hopefully make it easier.
Just sort of to sell you away
from single machine debugging,
it's definitely a slower cycle time.
If you're developing on a machine,
you load the text and you have to reboot,
I would very strongly urge you,
whether you're doing single
or dual machine debugging,
as soon as you get your driver
up and kind of limping along,
make it a priority to make
it unloadable cleanly.
And at every stage of your development,
make sure it unloads cleanly
because that's a good sign
that you're not leaking things.
Basically,
if you can't unload your kernel
extension and you don't know why,
it probably means you've got some
references outstanding that you
really ought to be cleaning up.
But certainly on single
machine debugging,
that's a real win,
being able to load and unload.
Now, of course,
you won't always get the opportunity
to unload because it will panic some.
And when that happens, of course,
you're risking data corruption.
We try very hard, of course,
on a panic to not lose your data,
but if you have uncommitted data
in a write buffer somewhere,
it will not get to disk.
So, if you're doing development on the
same system that you're testing on,
back up your data and
Just, you know, good common sense there.
But we also,
as you probably are well aware,
we don't have any local
kernel debugger support.
You can't debug the kernel on
the machine that you're running.
If we can save the questions
for a Q&A at the end,
I'll be happy to address that.
So a little more on
single machine debugging.
A lot of you have used
I/O Log for debugging.
It is very useful to kind of
figure out the flow of code and,
you know, is this function getting
called and if so,
what's the parameter?
It's certainly a first line of
defense for any kind of effort
to try to corner a problem.
But keep in mind, it really is intended
as a logging service.
It's not I/O debug, it's I/O log.
And it's intended to be very,
very low cost to the system.
So that's why there's only a
4K buffer and syslogd only runs
periodically to pull data out of
it and store it off to the file.
So the reason that you can overflow
it pretty easily is that's by design.
It's a low bandwidth logging service.
And it's also not synchronous.
It's not, you know,
it's within a few seconds but
it's certainly not synchronous.
Now if you really want
to use it synchronously,
you can.
You can make it synchronous
with this boot arg.
So you can use the end of your
RAM command to set your boot.
And you can use the boot arg,
I/O equals 200,000 hex.
And actually you can look in I/O Kit,
I/O Kit debug.h and there's a
whole list of bits in there for
subsystems that will log additional
information if you care to see it.
But this particular bit,
the 200,000 will turn I/O logs
and I believe also printfs into
synchronous writes to the console.
That's very important.
Writes to the console means the
actual screen that you're using.
So this is the, you know,
white text on the black background that
we used to see with panic messages.
This is back in the day.
Now if you want to get to the console,
there's a bit that you can
set in the boot arg again
to force that all the time.
But it's very simple.
At the login prompt,
you just type greater than console
for the user name and that will
exit the Windows server and
put you into the console mode.
And then you can do whatever thing
you need to do to trigger the problem.
And you'll see synchronous I/O logs
coming out on the console scrolling.
We also added two new APIs.
This has been requested on and off.
The primary one here is called
OS Report with Backtrace.
What this does is it gives you a
backtrace of the four prior stack frames,
that is prior to calling this,
and it allows you to see how you
got into a particular function.
Let's say your function keeps
getting calls with some bogus value
and you want to understand what the
call graph was that got you there.
This will just log as a normal
I/O log those four stack frames,
but it returns, unlike panic.
So if you need more stack
frames deep or if you want to
do some more complicated logic,
you know,
if you're trying to implement a logic
analyzer in your kernel extension,
you can use the OS backtrace below.
That's really the guts of
OS report with backtrace.
And this simply gives
you an array of pointers,
an array of stack frames.
So you can pass in as deep as you want.
You could get 20 frames,
and if they're there, it'll give you the
address of all of them.
So you could use that to do statistical
analysis on your call graph.
You could do all sorts of things.
But the top one there is great,
particularly if you are
single machine debugging,
because you don't have to take
a panic to cause something
interesting to get logged out.
Now again, these functions have no
place in commercial code.
Make sure that they get FDFed out,
compiled out in production code.
[Transcript missing]
Now you need to start by,
and this is true really for any kind
of a GDB work that you're going to
be doing on Mac OS X in the kernel,
you need to download the appropriate
kernel debug kit from the
Apple Developer Connection website.
We get these out as quickly as
we can after each new release or
software update that has a new kernel.
And it has what we
call a symboled kernel.
For those of you that don't know,
it's sort of a byproduct
of the build process.
It's the same binary
that's on the system,
but it has a tremendous amount
of debugging information in it,
the line numbers and everything.
The kernels are huge, but again,
it's loaded with information.
If you debug using the kernel
that's on your system already,
what you're going to see is addresses
relative to the nearest global function.
So you're going to see some
global function like bcopy,
and the offset you see might be,
I don't know,
several hundred k off of that because
there are several intervening static
functions that got stripped out,
and those symbols are not
in the shipping kernel.
But the symboled kernel has all those,
so it'll give you, tell you exactly what
function you're dying in.
Now, of course,
you'll have to also build symbol
versions of kernel extensions
for any keks that you've built,
right?
Anything that--any kernel extension
that you're loading yourself,
there are a variety of ways to do this.
You can have the keks loader drop the
symbols at the time that it loads them.
If you're debugging a
panic after the fact,
you can generate them
given the load address.
But again, the tech note gives you
the details on that.
Once you have those pieces
and you run GDB on it,
you can start to examine things.
X/I means basically examine memory as
an integer and you pass it an address,
or excuse me, an instruction.
X/X would be for integer.
X/I means examine it as an instruction.
You give it the address and it
shows you the instruction as
well as what function it's in.
Remember though, look at PC and LR,
the program counter and the link
register are the most recent things
that would have been executed.
But for all of the addresses you're
getting from the stack crawl,
remember that's the return address.
That's the address that the processor
would execute next when it returned.
So remember to subtract four.
That's the branching off
point that got you there.
And then because we're
talking about I/O Kit,
we're also talking about C++,
you're going to be getting
symbols that look like this,
the underbar, underbar, Z symbols.
Those are the mangled symbols.
They basically contain encoded
information about arguments and so on.
So if you run that through C++ Filt,
it can convert it into
a nicely readable file.
readable form there.
So that's a handy thing to do.
Now for two-machine debugging,
this is really the way to fly.
If you can at all do this,
I strongly recommend it.
We've added some capabilities
in Tiger recently,
we'll talk about that.
But obviously you have an
expendable target machine,
your development machine
is safe and secure.
I've known some people that set
up an environment where they
actually NFS export the root
volume from their build machine,
and so their target machine isn't
even running on a local disk,
it's actually rooted off of that NFS.
So it has no opportunity to
corrupt anything when it crashes,
and it makes it easy to
copy kernel extensions up.
So what'll happen is, as you move into a
two-machine environment,
you'll develop some scripts and some
techniques for moving the kecks around,
because it does involve RCPing
or moving kernel extensions
over in your favorite way,
but it really is the way to fly.
Now there are three ways to
attach to a target machine.
Ethernet is the tried and true way that
we've been talking about for years.
I'm not going to spend long on that.
But we've added FireWire debugging.
If you look into developer extras,
kernel debugging.
You have to install, of course,
the software developer kit.
But this allows you to connect to the
target machine via the FireWire cable.
Now you have to install a piece
both on the target machine and
on your development machine,
and you have to set up the
link prior to the panic.
So this doesn't save you if the
machine is panicked and you're
trying to get the data off of it.
You have to install a piece
both on the target machine and
on your development machine,
and you have to set up the
link prior to the panic.
So this doesn't save you if the
machine is panicked and you're
trying to get the data off of it.
Now you have to install a piece
both on the target machine and
on your development machine,
and you have to set up the
link prior to the panic.
So this doesn't save you if the
machine is panicked and you're
trying to get the data off of it.
So also with machine debugging
we have remote KPRNF.
You can connect over serial if you
have a machine with a serial port.
Not many machines
available like that today,
but you could maybe with
a G4 with a stealth card.
Firewire is really the
way to do it nowadays.
Coming soon,
and I believe the very next Firewire SDK,
there'll be the pieces that you
need in order to set this up.
And you can have the target machine,
KPRNF,
appear on a viewer on the test machine.
And if you had attended the
Firewire session previously,
they would have talked a
little bit more about this.
But I believe that's coming in
the Firewire SDK version 20.
That's similar to local logging,
except that it has some advantages.
One of the big ones is
you can save your session.
If you've logged 50 things,
you can cut and paste
it into a bug report,
for example,
or you can do searching on it,
which you can't do with a local console.
Just yet another reason
to go to machine here.
It's also a good bit faster.
If you're going over Firewire,
it's a pretty fast bus.
Now, to talk a little more
about kernel core dumps,
this is a network connected core dump.
And the idea here is you can set up
one collection server system for pretty
much as many machines as you want.
It's pretty common to have
one departmental server.
If you're a small company,
you could have one for the whole company.
And you configure each of the client
machines every time they panic to
dump core back to that machine.
Now it does take a little
bit of work to set up.
It's not tremendous.
There's a tech note here, tech note 2118,
that will walk you through all the steps.
But once you've got it set up,
it's a very low investment
in time to maintain.
And think about it.
You collect every panic that you have.
Every panic that occurs on your network,
you now have a full core image of.
So if you're looking for those hard
to reproduce panics and you hate
it because you missed it and you
couldn't attach to the machine,
well, this is a way to collect those.
And you can look at them at your leisure.
The core files are
obviously fairly large.
But at least you can collect them.
And you can move them around as you need.
Now of course, you're not talking to a
real live running machine.
You're talking to the memory image.
So you're not setting breakpoints
and continuing or single stepping.
But still,
pretty much everything is there.
So you can look at the stacks,
for example.
All right,
let's move our topic here to performance.
Performance is kind of hard to pin down.
It means different things
to different people.
So throughput is a classic measure.
How much data can you
cram through the system?
Latency is now in this day and
age with AV being so important,
latency is maybe a little
bit more interesting.
And jitter is also tossed around.
Latency is basically from the first bit
of data in to the last bit of data out,
how quickly can you move
transaction through the system?
And obviously with AV, it's important.
Jitter is really how
constant is that time?
If you can get data through
your system in a millisecond,
is it a millisecond plus
or minus a millisecond?
Or is it a millisecond plus
or minus a microsecond?
Low jitter is very important
because it allows you to keep
relatively small buffers.
Personally, I like efficiency as a
measure of performance.
It's ultimately what it comes down
to is how well are you utilizing the
hardware that the customer has bought.
It's optimized for low CPU cost.
When you do this,
you'll find after the fact that
it usually is improved either
your latency or your throughput
or sometimes both depending on
exactly how your code is structured.
So, you know, it's certainly a good way
to attack the problem.
Throughput and latency are
really external measurements and
I think they're observational.
Efficiency is an internal
measurement and I think that's
something that you can really get
behind and go through and look at.
It reduces the footprint of your system.
This is very, very important, right?
You're reducing memory.
If you optimize by reducing your
code path or reducing your data,
it's going to decrease the amount
of memory that you get wired down.
And in the kernel, that's very important.
But the interesting thing here
is CPU utilization directly
tracks with battery life.
and temperature and
therefore fan noise as well.
So you can actually say, "Well,
I'm making my driver run quieter
by making it more efficient."
And that is actually true.
Let's talk a little
more about wired memory.
This is very important.
Wired memory is the most expensive
kind of memory on your system
because it's permanently used.
It's not available to the
VM system to page out,
to have somebody else make use of.
So all in-kernel allocations
by default are wired memory.
You can get pageable
memory in the kernel,
but most of the common
allocators are wired.
Now, when you load your KEXT,
all of the text and all of
the data associated with that
KEXT are also in wired memory.
There are some rounding errors
here that actually make it a
little bit worse than that.
When you create a
subclass of I/O service,
because of the infrastructure
you're inheriting,
particularly the Vtable and the
binary compatibility patch-up stuff,
there's approximately 2K,
it's a little bit less than that,
about 2K used, just getting you there.
I don't want to discourage
you from using classes.
I'm a very strong believer
in object-oriented design.
I think it has real value.
But be aware that there's this tax.
You don't want to go and create
50 classes if you can avoid it.
If you can get by with two or three
classes with maybe some parameters that
would help describe the distinctions.
Also, subclass from the highest
point that you can.
The higher up you go
in the class hierarchy,
the less you're inheriting,
the less the permanent tax.
And this is something you
might not have considered.
If you make use of
internal helper classes,
these are maybe data representations
that you use that never migrate
outside of your kernel extension.
These objects are never
put into a dictionary.
They never get passed
off to anybody else.
They're just helpers.
You don't even need to make
those inherit from OS object.
You can actually create
your own root C++ class.
And you don't obviously need the binary
compatibility logic if everything
is contained within your text.
And that can even be true if
you have a suite of kecks that
are always shipped together.
You can share classes between them as
long as they're always shipped together.
You don't have to worry
about incompatibilities.
Now another thing I'll talk about,
because of the way
kernel extensions load,
there's approximately a 4K
tax of wired memory there.
And the reason is this:
we load the text segment and
the data segment of each text
at the beginning of a page.
And on average that means we're
going to waste about a half a
page at the end of your text.
Of course if your text has got
exactly 8K of text and 4K of data,
then we're not wasting any.
But on average, if you look at a system,
it's about 4K per kernel extension.
And this is so that when it
comes time to unload them,
we don't have a page partially
pinned down with some other text.
Now you can help minimize this text
by refactoring your text suites.
Here,
I'll show you some diagrams here that
give you an idea what I'm talking about.
Let's say you have two keks
that you ship as a suite.
You've got an actual driver and
then you've got a support library.
In a real world example,
you'd probably have more than one driver.
You'd have one library
and say three drivers,
something that were maybe
bus specific or something.
Well, if they're always loaded together,
then combine them.
And by doing that,
you just saved one page of wired memory
without having to change any code.
This is just changing
your project to combine.
Splitting can also make sense.
If you have a suite that you're putting
together in a single kernel extension,
but for most users, most of the time,
they're not loaded together,
you can split them up.
So in this example here,
the red kernel extension represents the
portions of your kecks that are talking
to the HID system and the portions
that are talking to the USB family.
Let's say those are used very frequently,
but maybe you don't think the
ADB functionality is used very
frequently on your product.
Since we don't have anything that
you can plug ADB into these days,
that's probably true.
And as a result,
you still have ADB compatibility
with your product here,
but you don't have the penalty
of loading all of that code.
It's not used.
The red text would get loaded
the majority of the time
when your device is present.
The blue text sits out on the file
system pretty much never getting loaded.
So again, you save not only 4K,
you save the entire cost
of that functionality.
The good general rule for memory
footprint is keep only what you need.
I can't stress enough how many times
I've seen kecks go out the door with
development and debugging information
in them that isn't necessary.
And I don't want to
pick on third parties.
Apple does this too.
It's very easy to forget.
So it's something that really
you need to be mindful of.
One thing you might not be aware,
the I/O registry is a
wired data structure.
It's in wired memory.
So when you put that 64K
block of data in there,
that's wired memory.
So don't put anything in there
that you don't absolutely need.
Of course,
your I/O personalities in your kernel
extension get downloaded into the
registry when you load the KEXT.
So that's one source for large
blocks of data would be to
have it in the personalities.
So avoid that if you can.
If you have a firmware image or
something that you're going to need
to download your hardware once,
put it in a throwaway KEXT.
Put it in a KEXT that can be unloaded.
And depending on the details
of what you're doing,
there are a variety of ways to do this.
Probably the easiest way is to
have the main KEXT for your device
match and load against the device.
And when it knows that
it needs some firmware,
it can register itself for matching
or it can create a nub that will
match that firmware KEXT in.
And in fact,
it gives you the opportunity to
have multiple firmware KEXTs,
right?
You could say, "Oh,
this is version B of the board,
so we're going to get this particular
KEXT that we need for version
B firmware." And it will download it
to the board and then will evaporate
and unload and free up that memory.
[Transcript missing]
I'm going to spend just a few seconds
here talking about memory fragmentation.
If you're writing an application,
memory fragmentation is annoying,
but when your app exits,
all that fragmentation is gone.
When you're running in a kernel,
fragmentation is kind of like a
permanent plaque in the system.
So think of the kernel as
an app that never exits,
or at least you hope it never exits.
So, yeah, and the fragmentation problem
is that as you allocate a bunch
of small pieces of memory,
typically smaller than a page,
and maybe keep them for a long time,
and then you've also got some allocations
that you only keep for a short time,
you can cause pages to be pinned
down that don't really need to be.
The efficiency of that memory goes down.
You have 4K per page,
maybe only 2K if it's
actually being used.
The other 2K is memory
that can't be freed up.
So, a couple things you can do
for a small amount of data,
and I want to emphasize small.
dozens of bytes,
put it on the stack if you can.
There's no allocations involved,
there's no locking, no atomic operations,
very efficient.
If we're doing string processing,
you want to do an 80 character string,
that's OK to put on the stack.
If you're talking about
larger allocations,
hundreds of bytes up to a page,
if you're doing something very briefly,
you might even consider doing
a whole page allocation.
We do zone allocations in the kernel,
so if your allocations happen
to be power of two sizes,
that aligns very well
with the zone allocators.
But I'll talk about that in a minute.
Also, cluster your long term allocations.
This is actually a very good technique.
Think about your average case.
How many buffers are you going to need?
How many command buffers?
Whatever.
Allocate them in a pool.
We have an example of
this in IO command pool,
and I believe that's in Darwin.
So you can have a look
at how we've done that.
What you can do is have your average
case allocated and waiting for you.
And then you can also allocate
additional resources on demand.
So if you have a spike where you
need some additional resources,
you can grow the pool,
and you can even have some logic in there
to drop it back down if you want to.
I would not recommend
allocating for your worst case,
because that's, of course,
permanent memory now that you've pinned.
Performance is always a trade off.
You need to decide what's going to
be most important and design for it.
But think about it.
That's the most important thing.
Make a conscious decision.
And if you have questions, ask us.
We're here to help.
Now, leaks.
Leaks.
These are evil,
particularly in kernel extensions,
because again,
we're leaking wired memory.
This isn't a page of memory that's going
to go cold and then get sort of forgotten
about off in a swap file somewhere.
This is memory that's
permanently allocated and
will never be touched again.
So the symptom is the machine
gets slower and slower and slower
as available memory goes down,
and then it'll eventually crash or the
user will get fed up and reboot it.
It seriously damages the user experience.
And the reason they're so evil
is they often don't get caught in
QA because you're doing maybe short
cycle time on testing or you're
not looking specifically for leaks.
So everything can work correctly.
Your driver may be perfect.
But if it's leaking, that's a problem for
the entire community.
[Transcript missing]
Locks, atomic operations in
general are expensive,
particularly on an MP system.
Our systems are cache coherent.
So you're not only taking time on
the processor that you're running on,
you're taking time on the other processor
because you're messing with its cache.
So you want to avoid taking more
locks than necessary and you want
to avoid taking them on the data
path because the data path is
where you want your low latency.
Anytime you have to do
an atomic operation,
you're introducing jitter because
you don't know if that resource is
going to be available for you to grab.
Also be aware,
any kernel function that says in the
documentation that this may block,
it's blocking because it's
doing an atomic operation.
It's acquiring a lock,
it's doing something that is
atomic and that's expensive.
So that's something to be aware
of as you're writing your code.
Context switches are expensive
compared particularly to
just a direct function call.
So you want to design your code
to avoid that as necessary.
And there's an interesting thing we
call the ping pong effect where you can
have one thread running on processor
zero and it wakes up another thread.
That other thread then schedules and runs
on processor one and starts working with
the data that the prior thread created.
Well, that's on the other processor and
the data is not in its data cache.
So you can have these two threads
ping ponging between the processors
and blowing cache affinity.
So if you can do what you need
to do without a context switch,
you avoid that, right?
Because you're still running in
the same thread of execution.
You're still on the same thread.
You're still on the same processor.
And of course,
disabling interrupts is evil for
a number of reasons because you're
basically taking the CPU away
from the scheduler and saying,
"No, I'm going to decide what runs,
not you." And that affects
our real-time performance.
So disabling interrupts.
That also causes jitter.
So we of course have I/O Work Loop.
Everybody who's looked at
I/O Kit has encountered this.
It's central.
It's one of our core concepts here.
But it really is designed
from a systemic view.
For those of you that have looked at
some of the APIs of I/O Work Loop and
they perhaps don't make immediate
sense when you're approaching it
from a driver/rider perspective,
it's because it was designed
from a systemic perspective.
How does this affect the whole system?
How does this work when you
stack multiple layers of
drivers on top of each other?
The main thing it tries to
do there is eliminate context
switches in the data path.
As you start from a user request and
you go all the way down to the hardware,
we tend to inherit the
I/O work loop along the client
provider chain in the registry,
which tends to be the data flow.
So, by and large,
a request can go all the way down
to the hardware on the client's
thread with no context switch.
And likewise with
interrupt event sources,
you're not doing any work,
you're not doing any interrupt
processing in the interrupt handler.
All you're doing is writing a filter to
make sure it really is your interrupt.
And then the thread schedules,
your work loop thread
will schedule to run.
Then it can process the data, but again,
that will be passed up the
stack all the way up to the
highest level on a single thread.
You're minimizing context switches.
I/O command gate.
This is an interesting one.
I've had a number of requests
for us to publish the lock
that's associated with this.
And the reason we don't do
this is really two reasons.
One is sort of a methodology,
a design methodology that
we like to talk about.
I call it a gated community.
The idea here is you have a set of
functions within the driver that all know
they're running behind the command gate.
They can call into each other without
having to do any additional locking.
Remember,
locking equals atomic operation.
And all of the functions outside of
that gated community know that they are
not running with the command gate held.
So when you want to call
into a gated function,
you take the function pointer
to it using that nice macro
that I showed you earlier.
You use command gate,
you call through to it.
It also has a very interesting
debugging technique associated with it.
Because all calls through the command
gate show up in the command gate.
And the function calls
are all function calls.
So if you have a deadlock,
a show all stacks will point exactly
where it is because every access to
one of these locks is on the stack.
Whereas if we publish the lock,
you'd be able to take the lock in
your code and release it directly.
Any imbalances there would
cause deadlocks and there
would be basically nothing
[Transcript missing]
If you haven't used the utility Top,
I urge you immediately after
the session is over to whip
out your laptop and run it.
Top is one of these essential
little utilities to understand
what is going on in the system.
And it isn't necessarily directly
that relevant to what drivers do,
but it does help you understand
when things go wrong,
maybe what is going wrong.
You've got a demon
spinning out of control.
You can use it a little bit for
seeing what's going on with drivers.
The kernel and the collection
of all kernel extensions are
accounted for under PID 0,
the kernel.
It's the very last line on the slide.
And if you're running a stress test,
if you're really beating on your driver,
maybe you've got a gigabit
Ethernet driver and you're
really pushing data through it,
that will show some numbers there.
And so you can actually start to
look at memory usage and CPU usage
collectively for the whole kernel.
And as your driver becomes more lean,
those numbers should get better.
So if you run this sort of on a bus,
you can actually see the difference.
And if you run this before
and after tuning exercise,
you might actually see these
needles wiggle a little bit.
I would hope you would be able to.
We also have the ability
to profile the kernel.
Again, this is the whole system really
is being profiled by Shark.
But if you're running a
load test on your driver,
this actually will probably
yield some interesting results.
Now, first and foremost,
you really do need to get the kernel
SDKs because Shark will give you,
again,
very peculiar data if you don't have
the symbol kernel because you're
going to be getting whatever the
nearest global symbol is and that
may not be very close to the actual
function that you're landing in.
So if you have the symbol kernel,
you run Shark, and you particularly put
your driver under load,
it will help you identify sort of the
hot call paths through your driver and
you will understand maybe a little bit
better about what you need to optimize.
Now this is something that has
come to our attention in the last
year and this is why I'm bringing
it up here for the first time.
The I/O registry is a large
sprawling data structure
that is protected by locks.
If your driver is directly
setting or modifying a container
in the registry that is talking
directly to the container,
the collection object,
[Transcript missing]
to the registry,
particularly to collection
objects in the registry,
need to go through and take this lock.
And there's a couple ways to do this.
The easiest way,
I've got another slide that
shows the way to remedy this,
but the easiest way to tell if
you're doing this is with this sys
control that we've added to TIGER.
This turns on strict checking.
And what this means is,
anytime one of these container
collection objects gets modified
while it's in the registry,
if that lock isn't taken,
you take an instant panic.
Now,
we shipped this off by default because
the system was not reliable with this on.
Okay, this is how important it is.
Now it's truly a lottery ticket, right?
You're modifying the dictionary that
contains your statistics information.
What's the likelihood that somebody's
reading it at that very instant?
It's pretty small, but it's non-zero.
So we see a number of data
corruption panics and we
believe most of them are this.
They usually will involve an
object that's been modified or
freed from the registry recently.
Now there are a few types of objects
that are safe to modify and there's
one in particular I want to talk about
because it's a handy technique to have.
The OS data object points
to a block of memory.
Now you can modify the memory
that's being pointed to by that.
That's not something that's
going to affect any pointers,
any reference counting anywhere.
And I know some people will use that to
communicate statistics information out.
They'll have a struct,
they wrap that as an OS data and
they put that in the registry
so an app can read that.
That's safe to do.
But if you're modifying a collection
or modifying anything that would
affect a reference count or
the existence of an object,
you're at risk.
Okay, so what do you do?
When you find one of these,
you need to make sure that the
modifications to the registry
go through I/O registry entry.
That is basically your super class.
I/O registry entry is the
parent of I/O service,
which is the parent of basically
all the I/O Kit driver classes.
There's a set property in there,
a set property function in there
that will take the correct lock,
make the changes to the registry,
and then return,
or release the lock and return.
If you need to do complex changes,
then you've got a couple options.
You can either copy the dictionary or
the collection that you want to modify,
make the changes there,
and then set them back in
atomically using set property.
And by the way, for Tiger,
we've added two new
APIs to help you with this.
One is copy collection.
This does a deep copy.
So it does not copy the leaf nodes.
What it does is it copies all
of the objects that would be at
risk for this type of corruption.
So if you've got an object
that you want to modify,
that's maybe multi-levels deep,
you can use copy collection on it.
It gives you a new collection object
that's safe for you to mess around with.
You make your changes,
then you use set property to put it back.
Let's say you want to make
a larger set of changes,
or you need to do maybe some read,
modify, write type stuff,
and you want to make it atomic.
We've added a new entry called run
property action to I/O registry entry.
And this, again,
sort of like the gated community concept,
this allows you to run a
function in the context,
that has that lock held.
And of course,
the fact the active returning from that
function causes the lock to be released.
So this run property action
will allow you to modify
anything in your registry entry.
It needs to be fairly quick,
because while that function is running,
nobody can read or modify the registry.
So you shouldn't be blocking in there.
Again, I want to talk about cyclers.
I won't spend a lot of
time talking about this.
This is something that we found
tremendously useful at Apple and
we're expanding our use of them.
But it's really cheap QA, right?
Find a way to exercise different
paths through your driver,
particularly what I call
bookended functions.
Close, open, load, unload,
anything that has some set of
states that you can walk through.
And build a cycler around it and as part
of your QA program run those cyclers.
And while you're running them,
look for leaks.
This is very easy to do.
It doesn't take that much
time once you've invested
the time to build the cycler,
that is.
And I think you'll learn a lot about your
driver that you might not have realized.
So just a few points about cyclers.
It's nice to make them issue the
cycles at controllable rates because
sometimes you want to do race
condition checking and you want
to really run them at top speed.
Sometimes you don't want
to really stress it.
You just want to say, you know,
cycle this thing once every five seconds.
And you're trying to do it,
trying to isolate each action separately.
But, you know, again,
no matter how you run it,
look at the memory as you do this.
And also make sure your cycler logs
something on every pass because
when something does go wrong,
you're going to have to do it again.
You're going to run your cycler
over the weekend when you go home.
You come back and realize
it died Saturday afternoon.
You're going to want to know why.
So log as much as you can.
Okay, I have two checklists for you.
This is something you should
be doing before you ready
your drivers for release.
The source checklist here,
I think there's a lot of kernel
extensions that could have been a
lot cleaner when they shipped if
they had gone through this checklist.
And again, this is made up of real
problems that I have seen.
Make sure your classes
use the correct naming.
We have a recommended
reverse DNS name idiom.
Make sure it's not my class.
Make sure it's not anything
that has Apple in it.
That's for us.
[Transcript missing]
Please make sure you don't have any
debugging log messages in there.
Printfs, kprintfs,
I/O logs that spam the console.
Remember, I/O logs get written to a file,
var log system log.
So if you're logging
50 messages a second,
and I have seen this,
those are going to fill up
your customer's hard disk.
So please just check that as
part of your final checkout.
Look for the log messages
and see what's out there.
And any other debugging specific stuff.
Panic, assert, I/O log,
all those things need to
be only in your debug code.
So make sure you're looking at that.
Binary checklist.
So this is something that maybe
your QA team would want to do
because you can do it without really
having to look at the source code.
Very simple one.
kextload-tn.
That means test the KEXT, but do nothing.
So it's not loading the KEXT,
it's just acting as if it were going to.
It runs all the validation checks.
And it will issue some diagnostic
messages describing what's going wrong.
You can add the V flag to
get more verbose output,
but that's a very easy check.
This is kind of a silly one.
Run a find on your KEXT and
see what all is in there.
I've seen a lot of like GDB backtraces.
I've seen, of course,
the .ds_store files and
other .files like that.
I've even seen source code in there.
I don't know how it got in there.
I'm not sure how somebody
set up their project.
But you really only ought to
be shipping the folders and the
Info.plist and the binary and maybe
if you have any other resources.
But make sure every file in there is
something you know you're shipping.
Also make sure your
binary has been stripped.
We recommend strip-S.
If you don't do this, guess what?
You're shipping line numbers
and source file names.
You want to keep your source code closed,
run stripped because you're
actually putting a lot of symbolic
information in there otherwise.
If you actually ship it unstripped,
it's also very large which
is why we personally care.
We don't mind if you
open up your source code,
but you might.
Look at your info P list.
The I/O Kit debug property needs
to be gone or it needs to be zero.
This causes additional logging
when your driver's loaded.
There's no point in this
being in a shipping text.
In fact, at one point we played around
with making those only load under
certain specific debug situations,
but we actually found that would break a
number of shipping texts if we did that.
So, and make sure your version
numbers match everywhere.
I know there's several
places it has to be checked.
We're working on reducing that number,
but make sure they're right.
Now also, check your copyright string.
This is not something we
personally care about,
but I've seen a lot of things
like copyright 1999 my company.
[Transcript missing]
I'm working on a utility called Kextpert.
It's basically a big honkin' Perl script.
And what I'm trying to do is
capture a lot of these tests,
a lot of these simple problems
that can be automated into a test.
That's what I'm trying to put in there.
It's a lot of complexity
because I'm also trying to build
in version awareness to it.
So you'll be able to basically
run Kextpert with a set of
versions you care about,
OS releases you want to run on,
and point it at a KEXT.
And it will go through it,
and for every file in there,
it will tell you what it thinks.
It will give you particularly errors.
These are things that you
probably would have already found,
but if you didn't,
it'll tell you about them.
Warnings are things that,
depending on context,
may or may not be a problem,
but they're certainly something
you want to track down.
Suggestions is an interesting one.
This is one we're going to use to promote
new and improved ways of doing things.
It's going to say, "Hey,
maybe if you use this property instead,
you could eliminate some complexity."
So it's going to look for telltale signs
of maybe an optimal ways of doing things.
And info is really in there for my sense.
And then it's going to
tell you what it thinks.
So it's going to tell you
what the parsing engine is
thinking about this file.
So it just kind of tells
you how it's analyzing
Now it's also going to contain a
section at the end that for every
one-liner that it spits out at the top,
hopefully will give you a link
to more detailed information.
So the ubiquitous, you know,
is the founder of the I/O Kit.
Dean Reece is the founder of the I/O Kit.
So for more information,
there's obviously a lot of
information about these topics.
You can go to developer.apple.com.
There's a special page there, WWDC 2005,
and that basically has all of
these links on it that will help
you find the resources you need.
Just a few quick words here.
The Apple Developer Connection
website has a few specific mail
lists that you want to know about.
Lists.apple.com is the site
you go to to set them up.
With the ATA and SCSI development list,
tremendously helpful to
folks working in that space.
This is also true for FireWire and USB.
We have dedicated lists.
Obviously, we can't talk too much about
future products or future plans,
but if you're trying to get something
going and you're getting stuck,
those are great places to go.
We also have Darwin as
a tremendous resource.
The Darwin Kernel is open sourced.
I don't know the exact percentage,
but it's something like 99.99% of
the kernel and the surrounding pieces
are made available as open source.
In addition to that,
there's a number of mail lists
that I personally frequent and
so do a number of other people.
General development, Darwin dev, USB.
That looks like a cut and
Sorry, I need to debug my slides.
So there's general development,
there's driver development,
and there's also kernel development.
So I believe it's
darwindrivers@list.apple.com is what
that next to last line should have been.
I'll make sure this gets
updated on the WWDC site.
And of course,
there are several related sessions.
Session 508 is about open source,
and obviously we're talking
about the kernel there.
USB session 509,
both of those are tomorrow.
And then on Thursday,
we've got the BSD talk,
which obviously if you're
working on non-I/O Kit pieces,
or even in some cases bridges,
that'll be important.
And then there's two labs.
Tomorrow afternoon,
we've got a KPI lab that's specifically
for file system development.
And then Thursday afternoon,
we have a general kernel
extension porting lab for Tiger.
and Craig Keithley is the person
in Developer Relations who is
responsible for the I/O Kit area.
And I, again,
am the manager of the I/O Kit team.